# 102. HAIR CHANGES AND BALDING GENERAL H

455
DERM
8.1 Ed. Authors/Editors
Laurie Hommema, MD
Emily Gorman, DO
102. HAIR CHANGES AND BALDING
GENERAL
Hair is a type of keratin generated by the hair matrix, which forms the shaft and
surrounding structures. The scalp has 100–150,000 hairs
Types of hair
Lanugo: Soft silky hair that covers fetus in utero; mostly shed before birth
Vellus: Short, fine hairs that cover the entire body except for the palms and soles
Terminal: Long, coarse pigmented hair; before puberty found only on the scalp and in
eyebrows and eyelashes. After puberty in the axilla, pubic area and on the chest and
face in men
Growth cycle: Hair growth and loss is continuous and random, not cyclical or seasonal
and can be defined by 3 discrete stages
Anagen: Active growth phase—1cm/month which decreases with age; plucked hair in
this phase has a 2–3mm white sheath at the end
Catagen: Active follicular regression that signals end of anagen; plucked hair has a
small white tip at end
Telogen: Resting phase, all cellular activity stops; represents 10% of all hair. 25–100
telogen hairs are normally shed each day; shampooing may increase this number
APPROACH TO PATIENT WITH HAIR LOSS—Signs and symptoms
Generalized versus discrete areas of hair loss and location
Rapid versus gradual hair loss
Partial versus complete balding
Changes in hair texture or breakage
Scarring
Medications/chemotherapy
Family history
PATTERNS OF HAIR LOSS AND MANAGEMENT
Diffuse, rapid hair loss
Telogen effluvium:Telogen (resting) hair loss often seen 3 months after pregnancy,
fever or severe illness, major surgery or change in diet and resolves spontaneously
over 1–2 months. No more than 50% of hairs are affected. Scarring and inflammation
are absent
Anagen effluvium:Abrupt insult to active growth. Usually due to chemo-therapeutics.
Only telogenic hairs remain
Management: Await resolution after insult is over
Diffuse, gradual hair loss, often with thinning, restricted to top of scalp—Androgenic
alopecia
Male pattern baldness: Frontal recession or loss over the temples or crown
Female pattern baldness: Gradual loss on the central scalp with preservation of the
frontal hair line
Management
Minoxidil (Rogaine): Available OTC as 2% solution and as 5% (extra strength)
solution or foam to be applied topically BID. Ineffective for frontal hair loss. Can
grow moderate to dense hair in 50% of patients. Effects may not be apparent for 6
months and new hair is lost when treatment stopped
Finasteride (Propecia): 1mg PO daily. Approved for men only (18–41 years).
Effective on hair loss in vertex and anterior mid-scalp. May result in hair gain but
456
DERM
some feel primary benefit is prevention of further hair loss. New hair lost when
treatment stopped
Surgical options include hair transplants, scalp reductions and flaps, and hair
weaves
Diffuse, gradual hair loss, often with thinning, all over scalp
Diffuse alopecia areata: Alopecia areata is rapid hair loss in sharply defined, usually
round, areas. It rarely occurs in more diffuse distributions with poorer potential for
regrowth
Etiology: Thyroid/iron deficiency, medications (Warfarin, Heparin, Propranolol,
Vitamin A), secondary syphilis, lupus, gradual hair loss with age
Management: Directed toward underlying disorder
Discrete balding areas without scarring or scalp inflammation
Alopecia areata: Most common cause in both children and adults. Etiology is
unknown. Check for ! shaped hairs at edge of balding areas. These are short, broken-
off hairs where broken end is thicker and darker than where hair emerges from scalp.
May be associated with nail pitting and longitudinal striations
Management: Generally resolves spontaneously but can also be treated with intra-
lesional steroids
Trichotillomania: Caused by the irresistible urge to pull out longer hairs leaving very
short, fine hairs. Often seen in children
Discrete balding areas with scarring or scalp inflammation
Infection: Tinea capitis, kerion, bacterial infection, herpes zoster
Traumatic: Burns, radiation
Neoplastic: Basal cell carcinoma, metastatic disease
Systemic: S.L.E., psoriasis, eczema, lichen planus, scleroderma
CLINICAL PEARLS
In U.S. $900 million dollars spent each year on hair loss
Androgenic alopecia (male pattern baldness) occurs in approximately ⅔of men
References
Katzer T, Junior AL, Beck R, et al. Physiopathology and current treatments of
androgenetic alopecia: Going beyond androgens and anti-androgens. Dermatol Ther
2019;32(5):e13059. doi: 10.1111/dth.13059. Epub 2019 Aug 26.PMID: 31400254.
Manabe M, Tsuboi R, Itami S, et al. Drafting Committee for the Guidelines for the Diagnosis
and Treatment of Male- and Female-Pattern Hair Loss. Guidelines for the diagnosis
and treatment of male-pattern and female-pattern hair loss, 2017 version. J Dermatol
2018;45(9):1031-43. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.14470. Epub 2018 Jun 4.PMID: 29863806.
Tai T, Kochhar A. Physiology and medical treatments for alopecia. Facial Plast Surg Clin North Am
2020;28(2):149-59. doi: 10.1016/j.fsc.2020.01.004.PMID: 32312501.
457
SURG
8.1 Ed. Section Editor
Stephen Auciello, MD
103. Evaluation of Abdominal Pain................................................................................459
104. Diverticulosis and Diverticulitis.............................................................................463
105. Management of Wounds.........................................................................................465
VIII. Surgery
458
